docs: explain the Charmhub public listing process and add a reference list of best practices (#1989)
canonical/operator: docs/howto/request-public-listing.md

(make-your-charm-discoverable)=
# Make your charm discoverable

> See first: [Charm maturity](#charm-maturity)

Once your charm is ready for wide production use, your next goal should be to get it publicly listed on [Charmhub](https://charmhub.io), so that it is visible in searches. This requires a lightweight review.

> ```{note}
> A listing review is **not** code review. The reviewer may be looking at some of the charm code, and may have comments on it, but the listing review is not a review of the architecture or design of the charm, and is not a line-by-line review of the charm code. Do architecture, design, and code review earlier in the charm development process -- reach out in the [Charm Development](https://matrix.to/#/#charmhub-charmdev:ubuntu.com) Matrix channel if you would like assistance.
> ```

Reviewer: Very minor - how about pulling the first part out of the note. For one thing it will make the text bigger (!)

Maybe something like this?

````suggestion
A listing review is **not** code review. The reviewer may be looking at some of the charm code, and may have comments on it, but the listing review is not a review of the architecture or design of the charm, and is not a line-by-line review of the charm code. Do architecture, design, and code review earlier in the charm development process.

```{tip}
Reach out in [Charm Development](https://matrix.to/#/#charmhub-charmdev:ubuntu.com) on Matrix if you would like assistance with designing and developing your charm.
```
````

## 1. Check your charm against the public listing criteria

Carry out your own review of your charm and its metadata. In particular, make sure that:

* The charm does what it is meant to do. If it is straightforward to deploy the charm and use the workload, then ensure there is a tutorial that covers this. If the charm deployment is complex (for example, requires specialised hardware or an entire solution of charms), create a video that demonstrates both deploying the charm and some example use of the workload.
* Some form of CI workflow exists that automatically releases the charm to an unstable channel on commits to the default branch.
* The charm has integration tests that run on every change to the default branch, and are passing. At minimum, the tests verify that the charm can be deployed and ends up in a success state, and that the charm can be integrated with at least one example for each 'provides' and 'requires' specified (including optional integrations, but excluding tracing) ending up in a success state.

> With respect to test coverage of the charm, note that:
> 
> * Unit tests are recommended, but *not* required.
> * A minimal set of integration tests is required, as outlined in the checklist.

Reviewer: I had a couple of small thoughts about this part. I think the sentence before the list could use simpler language. Also, I think the integration tests bullet is slightly confusing because integration tests have already been mentioned above, and the checklist has not been mentioned yet. How about these changes:

```suggestion
Review the charm's test coverage:

* Unit tests are recommended, but *not* required.
```

* There is no minimum for test coverage. We suggest that tests cover at least all configuration options and actions, as well as the observed Juju events, but this is not a requirement for listing.
* Charms may have additional tests in an external location, particularly if the charm has specific resource requirements (such as specific hardware). If this is the case, please mention it in the review request, ideally providing some mechanism for viewing the tests and their results.

Ensure your charm's documentation focuses on the charm itself. For workload-specific or Juju-related content, link to the appropriate upstream documentation. A smaller charm can have single-page documentation for its description. A bigger charm should include a full [Diátaxis](https://diataxis.fr) navigation tree. Ensure that the charm has documentation that covers:
* How to use the charm, including configuration, limitations, and deviations in behaviour from the 'non-charmed' version of the application.

> * How to modify the charm

Reviewer: What does "modify" mean here? The previous bullet already mentions configuration and I assume this isn't talking about forking & modifying the charm code.

Reviewer: I get you. Your suggestion sounds good to me :slightly_smiling_face:

The charm should follow documented [best practices](#follow-best-practices).

### Use the evaluation tool to get more details

Use the evaluation tool to see the list of requirements that will be used in the review, and have some automatically checked. In the root of your charm folder in your repository run the command:

```bash
uvx charmhub-listing-review:self-review
```

This will provide you with information about the full listing criteria, and, for those that can be checked automatically, whether the charm currently passes.

## 2. Request a review

```{note}
Each review covers exactly one charm. If your charm is designed to only work with other charms in a solution, open multiple review requests and note in them that they are connected.
```

Open a [listing request issue](https://github.com/canonical/charmhub-listing-review/issues/new?template=listing-request.yml). You will be asked for some basic information:

1. The name of the charm.
2. A URL to a Git source code repository.
3. Information for the reviewer to verify that the charm behaves as expected.
4. URLs for CI workflows and specific documentation.

> Creating your issue will trigger automation that will assign the review to a team, and add a comment that explains the review process and includes a checklist of the review criteria.

Reviewer: Very minor suggestion - I found the sentence slightly hard to read at first

```suggestion
Creating your issue will automatically assign the review to a team and add a comment that explains the review process. The comment includes a checklist of the review criteria.
```

Ensure your charm's documentation focuses on the charm itself. For workload-specific or Juju-related content, link to the appropriate upstream documentation. A smaller charm can have single-page documentation for its description. A bigger charm should include a full [Diátaxis](https://diataxis.fr) navigation tree. Ensure that the charm has documentation that covers:
* How to use the charm, including configuration, limitations, and deviations in behaviour from the 'non-charmed' version of the application.
* A concise summary of the charm in the `charmcraft.yaml` 'summary' field, and a more detailed description in the `charmcraft.yaml` 'description' field.
* Guidance for anyone that wants to contribute to the charm's development

The charm should follow documented [best practices](#follow-best-practices).

### Use the evaluation tool to get more details

Use the evaluation tool to see the list of requirements that will be used in the review, and have some automatically checked. In the root of your charm folder in your repository run the command:

```bash

> uvx charmhub-listing-review:self-review

Reviewer 2: This is cool!

(make-your-charm-discoverable)=
# Make your charm discoverable

> See first: [Charm maturity](#charm-maturity)

> Once your charm is ready for wide production use, get it publicly listed on [Charmhub](https://charmhub.io), so that it is visible in searches done by Juju users and other charm developers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once your charm is ready for wide production use, your next goal should be to get it publicly listed on [Charmhub](https://charmhub.io), so that it is visible in searches done by Juju users and other charm developers.
```

Anyone can upload a charm to Charmhub, which allows deploying the charm and viewing its information on Charmhub if you know the name of the charm. To have a charm publicly listed, meaning it will be found in searches on Charmhub and general web searches leading to Charmhub, it must pass through a lightweight review process. The goals of the review are:

1. Be transparent about the capabilities and qualities of a charm.

> 2. Ensure a common level of quality.

Reviewer 3: I don't like this "The goals of the review are..." bit. It's awkwardly phrased and doesn't add much: the "lightweight" bit before already suggests it's not going to be anything too deep, and the note that follows emphasizes that even further. I'd cut it out or squeeze it in the note somehow.

* The charm has integration tests that run on every change to the default branch, and are passing. At minimum, the tests verify that the charm can be deployed and ends up in a success state, and that the charm can be integrated with at least one example for each 'provides' and 'requires' specified (including optional integrations, but excluding tracing) ending up in a success state. The tests should be run with `charmcraft test`.

With respect to test coverage of the charm, note that:

* Unit tests are recommended, but *not* required.
* A minimal set of integration tests is required, as outlined in the checklist.
* There is no minimum for test coverage. We suggest that tests cover at least all configuration options and actions, as well as the observed Juju events, but this is not a requirement for listing.
* Charms may have additional tests in an external location, particularly if the charm has specific resource requirements (such as specific hardware). If this is the case, please mention it in the review request, ideally providing some mechanism for viewing the tests and their results.

> Ensure your charm's documentation focuses on the charm itself. For workload-specific or Juju-related content, link to the appropriate upstream documentation. A smaller charm can have single-page documentation for its description. A bigger charm should include a full [Diátaxis](https://diataxis.fr) navigation tree. Ensure that the charm has documentation that covers:

Reviewer 3: Documentation is first raised in the first paragraph; then, again here. I'd strreamline, if possible.

* How to use the charm, including configuration, limitations, and deviations in behaviour from the 'non-charmed' version of the application.
* How to modify the charm
* A concise summary of the charm in the `charmcraft.yaml` 'summary' field, and a more detailed description in the `charmcraft.yaml` 'description' field.

The charm should follow documented [best practices](#follow-best-practices).

## Review prerequisites

> Once your charm is close to review readiness, it's worth evaluating it yourself before requesting a review, to be confident in a positive result. To see the list of requirements and have some automatically checked, in the root of your charm folder in your repository run the command:

Reviewer 3: How is this different from self-evaluate?

(request-public-listing)=

> # Make your charm discoverable

Author: > I'd keep the title doc and anchor the same.

Ah, I forgot I had talked to David in a call about this and not commented here. I don't feel the current title is good, and so lazily was waiting to have the ref and title match until a better title was figured out. Agreed they should match.

> # Make your charm discoverable

Author: > we can make it simply into a section at the end of this doc: https://canonical-ubuntu-documentation-library--1989.com.readthedocs.build/ops/1989/howto/manage-charms/#publish-your-charm

Ah, I like this suggestion. @dwilding and I had talked about where to put this (neither of us loved it where it was) but I didn't think of putting it there.

> PS The note about public listing at the end of https://documentation.ubuntu.com/charmcraft/stable/howto/manage-charms/#publish-a-charm-on-charmhub should probably be replaced with a link to this new section in the Ops docs, and the Ops section on Publish should update the parenthesis that points to that note.

Yes - there's a bit of a scheduling thing here, in that I need to get the actual review system live, then merge this PR and then update the Charmcraft docs, and I think maybe there is some reference in Charmhub too.

> > See first: [](#charm-maturity)

Reviewer 3: Something's missing here. (But this comment might not be relevant anymore if you make the other changes I suggest.)

Author: It auto-fills the title from the ref. But I could make it explicit and that's probably nicer when reading the Markdown rather than generated cos.

Once your charm is ready for wide production use, get it publicly listed on [Charmhub](https://charmhub.io), so that it is visible in searches done by Juju users and other charm developers.

> While anyone can upload a charm to Charmhub, before a charm is publicly listed it must pass through a lightweight review process. The goals of the review are:

Author: I've reworded it. If you and/or David could see whether it's ok now that would be great (probably updating the test breaks this thread off from it, though, unfortunately).

1. Be transparent about the capabilities and qualities of a charm.
2. Ensure a common level of quality.

> A listing review is **not** code review. The reviewer may be looking at some of the charm code, and may have comments on it, but the listing review is not a review of the architecture or design of the charm, and is not a line-by-line review of the charm code. Do architecture, design, and code review earlier in the charm development process -- reach out in the [Charm Development](https://matrix.to/#/#charmhub-charmdev:ubuntu.com) Matrix channel if you would like assistance.

Reviewer 3: Also, this note might not be necessary anymore if we simply have a separate doc with the public listing review checklist. That doc might even be a doc in the public listing repo on GitHub.

> A listing review is **not** code review. The reviewer may be looking at some of the charm code, and may have comments on it, but the listing review is not a review of the architecture or design of the charm, and is not a line-by-line review of the charm code. Do architecture, design, and code review earlier in the charm development process -- reach out in the [Charm Development](https://matrix.to/#/#charmhub-charmdev:ubuntu.com) Matrix channel if you would like assistance.

Author: > Also, this note might not be necessary anymore if we simply have a separate doc with the public listing review checklist. That doc might even be a doc in the public listing repo on GitHub.

I do want to call this out somewhere, because I think it's been the biggest source of inconsistency over the last year or so of reviews. That's understandable: the existing process tells you to open a "from empty" pull request and then lets you discuss things in that PR or in Discourse, and that naturally leads to "well, I guess I'm reviewing the code". I want to be very clear that you're *not* expected to do that. Probably over time as people get used to the new system it'll be less important to call this out.

> ## Steps of a review

Author: Ah, indeed, that's the big thing I was missing here, thanks!

I've reworked it to be much more how-to-y.

2. The reviewer checks if the prerequisites are met and the issue is ready.
3. The public review is carried out as a conversation on the issue.
4. The review concludes if the charm is 'publication ready', and if so the store team is notified to publicly list the charm.

The result of the process is that:
* if the review is successful, the charm is switched to listed mode, or
* if the review is unsuccessful, the charm does not reach the required criteria and the charm remains unlisted, until the issues are resolved.

## Review prerequisites

The listing request issue will prompt the author to provide information about the charm:

1. The name of the charm.
2. A URL to a Git source code repository.
3. Information for the reviewer to verify that the charm behaves as expected.
4. URLs for CI workflows and specific documentation.

Once your charm is close to review readiness, it's worth evaluating it yourself before requesting a review, to be confident in a positive result. To see the list of requirements and have some automatically checked, in the root of your charm folder in your repository run the command:

```bash
uvx --with=package-name something-or-other-here

> ```

Author: Ah, yeah this is tbd, I should have figured it out before moving out of draft. Will fix tomorrow, thanks!

> * The charm has integration tests that run on every change to the default branch, and are passing. At minimum, the tests verify that the charm can be deployed and ends up in a success state, and that the charm can be integrated with at least one example for each 'provides' and 'requires' specified (including optional integrations, but excluding tracing) ending up in a success state. The tests should be run with `charmcraft test`.

Author: Ah, yes, I'm a bit too far ahead here. `charmcraft test` is non-experimental in Charmcraft 4, I think, but it's probably still a few months too early to be expecting people to be using spread.

```suggestion
* The charm has integration tests that run on every change to the default branch, and are passing. At minimum, the tests verify that the charm can be deployed and ends up in a success state, and that the charm can be integrated with at least one example for each 'provides' and 'requires' specified (including optional integrations, but excluding tracing) ending up in a success state.
```

A charm's documentation should focus on the charm itself. For workload-specific or Juju-related content, link to the appropriate upstream documentation. A smaller charm can have single-page documentation for its description. A bigger charm should include a full [Diátaxis](https://diataxis.fr) navigation tree. Ensure that the charm has documentation that covers:
* How to use the charm, including configuration, limitations, and deviations in behaviour from the 'non-charmed' version of the application.
* How to modify the charm
* A concise summary of the charm in the `charmcraft.yaml` 'summary' field, and a more detailed description in the `charmcraft.yaml` 'description' field.

The charm should follow documented [best practices](#best-practices).

The following checks are not required for listing, but are recommended for all charms.

> 

Reviewer 3: This list is already in Charm maturity. I'd remove it from here.

> ```{tip}
> Avoid editing the issue description. The automation uses the data in the description to perform automated checks, which speeds up the review process. If you need to provide additional information to the reviewer, or want to respond to review comments, add a new comment on this issue.
> ```

Reviewer: Or, to make it more positive and less scary-looking, keep it as a tip and flip the wording:

````suggestion
```{tip}
To provide additional information to the reviewer or respond to review feedback, add a comment on the issue. Avoid editing the issue description. Our automation uses the data in the description to perform automated checks, which speeds up the review process.
```
````

> ```

Author: I had this as a caution, but the starter pack docs say that caution is meant to be reserved for things like data loss, so I dropped it down to a tip, because it's not that critical.
